Novel RF Analysis and Design Techniques

Ali Homayoun
Advisor: Prof. Behzad Razavi

Thursday, October 31, 2013, 10 a.m.
Engr. IV Bldg, Maxwell Room 57-124

Abstract
The design of RF integrated circuits continues to challenge engineers and researchers, demanding new circuit topologies and transceiver architectures. New ideas often require new analysis techniques as well so that the designer can insightfully quantify the underlying principles.

This research addresses three problems in RF circuits: (1) analysis of phase noise in phase/frequency detectors (PFDs), an essential component in RF synthesizers; (2) analysis of the relation between the phase noise of delay lines and ring oscillators; and (3) design of a new low-power RF CMOS receiver for IEEE802.11a. The first analysis derives equations for the phase noise and shows that an octave increase in the input frequency raises the phase noise by 6 dB if flicker noise is dominant and by 3 dB if white noise is dominant. The second analysis reveals a simple “shaping” function and also dispels the commonly-accepted premise that symmetric rise and fall times in a ring oscillator suppress the upconversion of flicker noise.

This presentation primarily deals with the design of a low-power 5-GHz receiver. While advances in the art have considerably reduced the power consumption of RF oscillators, frequency dividers, and analog-to-digital converters, the main receiver chain in 5-GHz systems draws a disproportionately high power, about 46 mW. It is therefore desirable to develop low-power RX front ends and baseband filters for WiFi applications. This work introduces a complete 5-GHz CMOS receiver that meets the 11a sensitivity, blocking, and filtering requirements while consuming 11.6 mW. This fourfold reduction in power is achieved through the use of a transformer as a low-noise amplifier, passive mixers, and non-invasive baseband filtering. A new analysis of passive current-driven mixers also reveals a fundamental mistake in previous derivations.


Biography 
Ali Homayoun received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronics engineering from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2006 and 2009, respectively. In fall 2009, he joined the University of California, Los Angeles, to pursue the Ph.D. degree.  His research interests include RF, analog, and mixed-mode integrated circuit design.


This work consists of three different parts. In part one, a low-power receiver technique is presented. While advances in the art have considerably reduced the power consumption of frequency synthesizers and analog-to-digital converters, the main receiver path still dissipates high power. We have proposed the “zero-power” RF front end which replaces the low-noise amplifier with a transformer. The transformer is then followed by quadrature passive mixers. The input impedance, conversion gain, and noise figure of the transformer-mixer combination is formulated which sheds light on the design of passive mixers. Noninvasive filtering is used for baseband channel selection which outperforms the conventional filtering having lower noise and higher interferer-handling capability. A 5-GHz 11.6-mW receiver for IEEE 802.11a applications is fabricated in 65-nm digital CMOS technology as a proof of concept.

Part two analyzes the phase noise arising from the phase/frequency detector (PFD) in charge-pump phase-locked loops as a major contributor of in-band phase noise of the frequency synthesizers. It has been shown that the phase noise comes from the random pulsewidth difference between the Up and Down signals. The PFD is then broken into digital gates and its phase noise is formulated for both flicker and white noise sources. Having compact equations for the PFD phase noise enables us to use MATLAB to minimize the PFD power for a target phase noise. The optimization technique saves us 4 to 8 dB when applied to two PFD topologies, one using static NAND gates and the other employing true single-phase clocking.

In the last part, the ring oscillator as the main contributor of the out-of-band phase noise of the frequency synthesizers is studied. The phase noise of ring oscillators is related to the phase noise of their constituent delay cells with a simple shaping function which is computed using first principles and is applicable to both flicker-noise-induced and white-noise-induced phase noise. The derived compact equations help us optimize the ring oscillators. It is also shown that flicker noise upconversion in ring oscillators is primarily a function of the total gate capacitance and inevitable regardless of the risetime and falltime symmetry. Two oscillator prototypes fabricated in 65-nm CMOS technology verify the validity of the results.
